Maven bom (#371)
reflectoring/reflectoring.github.io: _posts/2021-04-05-maven-bom.md

Using the command `mvn dependency:tree`, we can list all the dependencies including the transitive ones. The result is:

```markdown
+- org.springframework:spring-context:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  +- org.springframework:spring-aop:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  +- org.springframework:spring-beans:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  +- org.springframework:spring-core:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  |  \- org.springframework:spring-jcl:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  \- org.springframework:spring-expression:jar:5.3.5:compile
\- org.springframework.security:spring-security-web:jar:5.4.5:compile
   +- org.springframework.security:spring-security-core:jar:5.4.5:compile
   \- org.springframework:spring-web:jar:5.2.13.RELEASE:compile
```

It is a surprise: We started from two dependencies, and in this output, we find out that maven pulled seven other dependencies with different versions. The other dependencies are simply transitive. Just imagine the dependency tree that we will have in a multi-module project with hundreds of dependencies.

The question that we can have now is how does Maven handle the case where multiple versions of the same dependency are pulled? 

> The first thing to know is that Maven can't sort versions: The versions are arbitrary strings and may not follow a strict semantic sequence. For example, if we have two versions `1.2` and `1.11`, we know that `1.11` comes after `1.2` but the String comparison gives `1.11` before `1.2`. Other version values can be "`1.1-rc1`" or "`1.1-FINAL`", that's why sorting versions by Maven is not a solution.  

Reviewer: Before going into the details of dependency resolution you need to explain the problem with the above dependency tree.  Is there a problem with transitive dependencies in the dependency tree? I don't see one. Maybe start directly with the "-verbose" example to showcase the conflicts?

- #### Introduce `dependencyManagement` section in the POM file

For projects with sub-modules, to ensure compatibility and coherence between all the modules, we need a way to provide the same version of a dependency across all sub-modules. Here comes in action the `dependencyManagement` section: it provides a lookup table for Maven to help determine the selected version of a transitive dependency and to centralize dependency information.

A `dependencyManagement`  section contains dependency  elements. Each dependency is a lookup reference for Maven to determine the version to select for transitive dependencies. The version of the dependency is mandatory in this section. However, outside `dependencyManagement`  section, you can omit the version from your dependencies, and Maven will select the correct version of the transitive dependencies from the list of dependencies provided in `dependencyManagement`.

> We should note that defining a dependency in the `dependencyManagement` section doesn't add it to the dependency tree of the project, it is used just for lookup reference. Instead, for any dependency in a project's dependency tree, if it appears in the BOM file, then the version from the BOM will be used.

Reviewer: The second sentence about the BOM file doesn't make sense, yet, because we haven't introduced the BOM file, yet. What do you mean with that? Or can we remove that sentence?

Author: I will remove it since we didn't introduce BOM yet.
I tries to say that Maven will resolve dependencies'versions from BOM if one is used.

<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-beans</artifactId>
            <version>5.2.13.RELEASE</version>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

Now we want Maven to resolve version `5.2.13.RELEASE` instead of `5.3.5`.

Let's execute the command `mvn dependency:tree` one more time. The result is:

```markdown
+- org.springframework:spring-context:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  +- org.springframework:spring-aop:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  +- org.springframework:spring-beans:jar:5.2.13.RELEASE:compile
|  +- org.springframework:spring-core:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  |  \- org.springframework:spring-jcl:jar:5.3.5:compile
|  \- org.springframework:spring-expression:jar:5.3.5:compile
\- org.springframework.security:spring-security-web:jar:5.4.5:compile
   +- org.springframework.security:spring-security-core:jar:5.4.5:compile
   \- org.springframework:spring-web:jar:5.2.13.RELEASE:compile
```

In the dependency tree, we find the `5.2.13.RELEASE` version for `spring-beans`. This is the version that we wanted Maven to resolve for each `spring-beans` transitive dependency.

> If `spring-beans` was a direct dependency, in order to take advantage of the BOM file, we will no longer have to set the version when adding the dependency:

Reviewer: Again, we don't know what a BOM file is, yet.

Author: I replaced BOM with `dependencyManagement` since we were talking about it earlier

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-beans</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

> This way, Maven will resolve the version using the information provided in the BOM file.

Reviewer: Again, we don't know what a BOM file is, yet.

Author: I replaced BOM with `dependencyManagement` section since we were talking about it earlier.

There are two types of dependencies in Maven:

- **direct dependencies**:  dependencies that are explicitly included in our Project Object Model (`pom.xml`) file in the `<dependencies>` section. They can be added using the `<dependency>` tag. Here is an example of a logging library added to a `pom.xml` file:

  ```xml
  <dependencies>
      <dependency>
          <groupId>log4j</groupId>
          <artifactId>log4j</artifactId>
          <version>1.2.17</version>
      </dependency>
  </dependencies>
  ```

- **transitive dependencies**: a project that we include as a dependency in our project, like the logging library above, can declare its own dependencies in a `pom.xml` file. **These dependencies are then considered *transitive* dependencies to our project**. When Maven pulls a direct dependency, it also pulls its transitive dependencies.

## Transitive Dependencies with Maven

Now that we have an overview of the different dependency types in Maven, let's see in detail how Maven deals with transitive dependencies in a project.

As an example, we'll look at two dependencies from the Spring Framework: `spring-context` and `spring-security-web`.

> In the `pom.xml` file we add them as direct dependencies, purposefully selecting two different version numbers:

Author: We may choose another word instead of **purposefully**, it is not a common word for readers I think. Maybe **deliberately** or **intentionally**?

Reviewer: yes, good idea! I will change that

- `D1(v1) -> D11(v11) -> D12(v12) -> DT(v1.3)`
- `D2(v2) -> DT(v1.2)`
- `D3(v3) -> D31(v31) -> DT(v1.0)`
- `D4(v4) -> DT(v1.5)`

Note that each of the direct dependencies pulls in a different version of the `DT` dependency.

Maven will create a dependency tree and following the criteria mentioned above, a dependency will be selected for `DT`:

![Transitive dependency resolution](/assets/img/posts/bom/transitive-dependencies-resolution.png)

We note that the resolution order played a major role in choosing the `DT` dependency since the `v1.2` and `v1.5` had the same depth, but `v1.2` came first in the resolution order. So even if `v1.2` is not the last version of `DT`, Maven chose it to work with.

If we wanted to use version `v1.5` in this case, we could simply add the dependency `D4` before `D2` in our POM file. In this case, `v1.5` will be first in terms of resolution order and Maven will select it.

So, to help us understand the dependency tree result from above, Maven indicates for each transitive dependency why it was omitted:

> - **"omitted for duplicate"** means that the same dependency with the *same* version is declared at another place in the dependency tree higher in resolution order or depth and Maven prefers that one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **"omitted for duplicate"** means that Maven preferred another dependency over this one with the same name and version (i.e. the other dependency had a higher priority according to the resolution order and depth)
```

- **"omitted for conflict"** means that the same dependency with a *different* version is declared at another place in the dependency tree higher in resolution order or depth and Maven prefers that one.

> 

Author: For these two cases it's the opposite: the other dependency chosen by Maven is lower in resolution order and nearer in depth

Reviewer: @bakic hmm, I understand if Maven says "omitted", it means that THIS dependency (i.e. the dependency annotated with "omitted")  is lower in resolution order and the OTHER dependency is higher in resolution order. Otherwise Maven would choose the OTHER dependency, wouldn't it?

Author: @thombergs it's the opposite, the OTHER dependency is the one chosen by Maven which is LOWER in resolution order and the NEAREST in depth. The one omitted is the opposite of it.
From the article: Maven takes the approach of the nearest transitive dependency in the tree depth and the first in resolution

Author: @thombergs ah I see, I think that we have different interpretations of the lower and higher terms, but our comprehension of the mechanism of Maven is the same. By lower you mean the first in resolution order and higher the one that comes after, isn't it? These terms may be confusing, don't you think that? in fact, we are having this discussion because of them 😅
